Well hi I'm Bob Schrupp physical therapist
I'm Brad Heineck, physical therapist as well. I was just looking at this book about cervical surgery
Rather interesting, it kind of relates to what we're going to talk about today, we're going to talk about Peyton Manning
What are you reading about? I'm reading about advanced surgical surgery. Oh, where did you get that one?
Well, that's not available to you because to you because you're just not up to my level yet
Peyton Manning apparently has had two surgeries again
We're not really privy to what went on, but they are talking about a cervical disc and a cervical bulge
And so what we would talk about, what we thought we'd show you today is what we speculate may have happened and then also
I'd like to just briefly touch upon how we often treat this
When it comes down to it, you know take the human body whether you're a football player
or a basketball player you're just an average joe like you and I we all have the same spine we got seven cervical vertebrae, 12 thoracic, and 7 lumbar...5 lumbar
Actually some people do that six, but the basics are there and what we're going to talk about is going to inform you
on really what's going on beneath the skin.
Okay, so this is a spine, this is
where your head would be, its kind of cut off here. This is your pelvis
These are the legs, the first seven bones that stack up here make your neck
Alright, and I'm again
I'm not sure exactly at what level he had trouble with but
It had to be one of the first seven because it did involve the cervical or the neck
Now in between each one of these bones or vertebrae are a disc and in a minute
We'll show you exactly what that looks like by using a larger model
But I don't know if you can pan in here at all and see any of this
Yeah, probably like this. Just bring it right in, right into here
The majority of neck injuries occur in the lower vertebrae which
Were one two three four five six seven so we're talking usually six to seven five six or seven are usually involved
We don't know that for sure they don't let that information out
But that's where it's probably at wouldn't you agree Bob?
So we're probably talking the lower neck, so on your body if you go back here and you feel
Oh that big bump there that most people have that is C7
Okay, so we're talking about that part of the neck if you can see that, okay the other thing
I want you to point out that I want you to see on this model here
Is that these yellow things coming out here now these are cut off they actually
they extend all the way down into your arms
Those are the nerves and those are what can give you pain
And what happens is the discs can actually bulge
Usually a bulge doesn't do it
But maybe a herniation will actually push on that nerve and send pain down into your arm
Or you know into the upper quadrant here
So that's what we're going to show you when we use our model is how that can happen
Any other comments Brad? These look like little worms
But they're not they're actually nerves and that's really what they look like if you do look at a real cadaver
The only thing I wanted to ask is this is a pretty short person look at these legs
He'd make a good baseball hitter because you couldn't pitch to him
Alright, why don't we cut right now, and then we'll bring in the model
Okay, we're going to continue on with looking at in detail
the injury that can happen to the cervical spine a very common one
Bob talked about it as being a bulging or a herniated disc.
Can you throw something in?
Nice job. Thank you. All right. Let's zoom right in here, okay, Lindsey
Right in where the pen is, get as close as you can
Okay here we go we're going to look at
C6 and C7 right here cervical vertebrae
number 6 to number 7 they start from the top
and you come down now if you look right in here is the disc, okay?
Here's the nerve that Bob was talking about. Now the disc
herniates or shifts and gets tissue and presses against this nerve right here, great source of pain and again
it doesn't just hurt here
But the pain can radiate
where the nerve goes so that can go into the scapular region by the shoulder blade down the shoulder
and I can't go all the way down into the hands and fingers which obviously for a
professional football player trying to throw the ball is going to cause some issues
So what we need to do is get in there clear this area out
in here so the nerve is freed up and it can move and you can have normal range of motion with the neck so
we can look right you can look left look down field for the long ball look for the short ball
And you have some success passing so that's what we're going to look at right there
Okay now let's look at those two vertebra sets C6 and C7 go ahead throw me. There we go. Here we got a couple models here.
Lindsey the model behind the camera, but she's not coming out today. Actually seriously we've got the vertebrae cup model
Okay, coffee cup that people in the health field will use particularly
therapists and orthopedic surgeons
You got some coffee to drink, it works great for this demonstration here's C7 remember the disc I talked about a disc is
Not rigid like a hockey puck
There's some fluidity to it and it has some give so that you can rotate your neck up and down and round etc
So this works great for a model, okay, so here we got C6
C7 now if you were to rotate your head to the right if you can see a little bit of give between each vertebrae
as it works up the chamber, it looks like you've got too much coffee
Okay, so they can rotate this way this way now when you bring your head down
Look what happens it separates back here when you look up towards the sky whoops
Give way here and back whoa and if that happens you got some serious problems
Okay, all right
All right here we go, so let's zoom in right in here Lindsey
Right in here is where that nerve, we're going to use this pen as a nerve
Came out of the spine then it goes down into the shoulder into the arm
Now what can happen to a real dramatic jolt to the head or this can happen
People like working on a computer and have poor posture
but we're gonna talk about Peyton Manning's case he probably had a
severe blow to the head as he had a number of concussions over the years is
This can happen in the bulb that this can actually bulge out like that
This is a really neat model this is the neatest thing that we really invented for instructing and educating patients on how discs herniate
But you can see where if that happens
It's going to interfere with that nerve creating a lot of pain a lot of problems
And that's what they got to get in and with surgery
They're gonna just actually cut that right off get things back in then it's going to take a number of weeks
for scar tissue to heal over that and start to regain range of motion and become functional again
How was that Bob? Good I think